Working the Twelve Steps of NA
… without the ‘God part’

‘Get to the Point’ group
of Narcotics Anonymous
Montréal, 2019

About half of the Twelve Steps seem to be about God. If I don’t
believe in God, does this mean they won’t work for me? Does this
mean that NA can’t help me to stop using drugs, lose the desire to
use and find a new way to live?
These are the kinds of questions that many addicts have asked
when first coming to NA. Our experience has confirmed that NA
does work and that the ‘God part’ of the Twelve Steps is really just
optional. It works for some addicts, but it doesn’t for others. The
important thing is that we addicts need each other to heal from
our disease and this is what happens in Narcotics Anonymous,
regardless of our particular philosophical, ideological or religious
beliefs – or lack of belief. In one way or another, we have all been
where you have been.
Spiritual principles?
What does it mean when we say that this is a spiritual, not
religious program? Despite its traditional association with religion,
the term ‘spirituality’ refers broadly to any inner path enabling a
person to discover the essence of who they really are; or the
‘deepest values and meanings by which people live’ (Wikipedia).
This becomes even clearer when our literature refers to ‘spiritual
principles’ such as honesty, open-mindedness and willingness.
These are practical, human values, not mystical concepts or
religious dogmas that are dependent upon any particular belief
system.
Our active addiction leaves us ‘spiritually bankrupt’. We have lost
our way on that inner path we began in childhood towards
developing our own personal values and goals. The Twelve Steps
are a method that addicts have discovered to first understand

who we really are, to accept ourselves, and then to heal from the
damage our disease has wrought. We can receive the help we
need and learn that we can best do this by helping others.
The steps are not a formula that we can simply follow like
assembly instructions from Ikea. The parts we have to put
together are not all the same! The steps are a set of suggested
guidelines that we each have to individually work, with the help of
a sponsor and other recovering addicts. We discover how to apply
these steps to ourselves with our own particular life experiences,
personalities, values and beliefs. We learn by identifying with our
similarities rather than by comparing our differences. We grow by
striving for progress, not perfection, learning from our mistakes
rather than by playing the role of victim of them.
A little history on the Steps
Did you know that in the late 1930’s, the original pioneers of the
Twelve Steps included a number of atheists? Jim B. authored the
Third Tradition (‘the only requirement for membership’) and
argued for the complete removal of ‘God’ from the ‘Big Book,’
Alcoholics Anonymous, when it was first being written.
A compromise was eventually reached with the Christian
members when step 2 was reworded from ‘God’ to ‘a Power
greater than ourselves,’ and ‘God’ was replaced by ‘God as we
understood Him’ in steps 3 and 11. Finally, the 12 steps
themselves were presented as ‘suggested as a Program of
Recovery,’ rather than as an obligation. As Bill W. described it,
‘this was the great contribution of our atheists and agnostics.
They had widened our gateway so that all who suffer might pass
through, regardless of their belief or lack of belief.’1

Our Basic Text explains: ‘The Twelve Steps of Narcotics
Anonymous, as adapted from AA, are the basis of our recovery
program. We have only broadened their perspective. We follow
the same path with a single exception; our identification as
addicts is all-inclusive with respect to any mood-changing, mindaltering substance … our problem is not a specific substance, it is a
disease called addiction.’ 2
In 1992, the NA World Service Conference was presented with a
motion proposing that the word ‘God’ be replaced by ‘higher
power’ and that non-gender language be applied to ‘higher
power’ in all NA literature.3 This was put on the back burner and,
as far as we know, it is still simmering there. In the meantime,
those of us who do not necessarily believe in a deity can still
benefit from the wealth of practical experience that is embodied
in the Twelve Steps of NA, by identifying what works for us, and
leaving aside what doesn’t.
The Twelve Steps are tools that we are each free to explore,
interpret and adapt to our own recoveries. They are not some
kind of sacred text frozen in time. As the principal author of the
Twelve Steps Bill W. put it: ‘We must remember that AA’s Steps
are suggestions only. A belief in them as they stand is not at all a
requirement for membership among us. This liberty has made AA
available to thousands who never would have tried at all, had we
insisted on the Twelve Steps just as written.’4
Working the Steps
Understanding requires the conscious participation of the
individual, an act of finding out. We don’t just read about or talk
about the steps, we have to work them. This means that we need

to examine our own experience, our own characters, our own
behaviour and apply to ourselves what we learn at meetings and
in the literature. We can get advice and help, but we have to do
the actual work ourselves. Many of us work the steps by writing
down our reflections and discoveries in a step journal. We
experiment, and seek what works for us. We discover that the
simple principles embodied in the steps are accessible to all
addicts, regardless of our individual beliefs.
We suggest that the steps be worked with the guidance of a
sponsor, a more experienced member we trust who may or may
not share our personal beliefs, but who is non-judgemental and
accepting of ours. We also study and use the books, Narcotics
Anonymous (Basic Text), It Works: How and Why and The NA Step
Working Guides. These provide a wealth of practical experience by
recovering addicts. The occasional ‘God part’ need not get in the
way of recovery for the atheist or agnostic addict.
The following suggestions may also prove useful:
Step One
We admitted that we were powerless over our addiction, that our
lives had become unmanageable.
We often call this the step of surrendering. We need to be honest
in examining ourselves and accept the reality of our addiction,
that we have made a mess of our lives. We now have to get real.
Addiction is a progressive, incurable and fatal disease that affects
us physically, mentally and spiritually. We give up trying to find a
way to successfully use drugs. Abstinence, staying clean, becomes
our priority, ‘no matter what.’

Step Two
We came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could
restore us to sanity.

Step Five
We admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being
the exact nature of our wrongs.

Many of us understand this as simply: we realized that we need
help. We develop the open-mindedness to recognize that we can
get this help from already recovering addicts in the rooms. We
allow ourselves to have the hope and faith (or trust) that we too
can learn how they do it. ‘The therapeutic value of one addict
helping another is without parallel,’ ‘ I can’t, we can.’

Once again, the God part is entirely optional. But it is crucial that
we share what we wrote in our Fourth Step with another person.
We need to come clean in order to start letting go of our secrets,
guilt and shame. The ‘exact nature of our wrongs’ is not simply a
description of events we are not proud of. It is identifying why we
acted this way. We developed many of our negative behaviours as
a misguided strategy to protect ourselves, to survive. Courage and
trust, as well as honesty, are needed to work this step.

Step Three
We made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care
of God as we understood Him.
Having become more open-minded about getting help, we now
act by seeking out and accepting this help. In other words, we
made a decision to stop trying to control everything ourselves and
to trust the collective wisdom of other recovering addicts.
Willingness is the principle involved in making this commitment to
our recovery, a commitment to working our personal NA program.

Step Six
We were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of
character.
Having identified the weaknesses in our characters that lead us to
keep repeating the same mistakes, we clearly recognized that we
need to change these patterns. Willingness, determination and
trust that change is possible are all helpful principles here.

Step Four
We made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.

Step Seven
We humbly asked Him to remove our shortcomings.

What will likely bother us the most about this step is the word
‘moral.’ It suggests the religious concept of ‘sin.’ Try: We made a
searching and fearless inventory of our strengths and weaknesses.
Active addiction has deeply affected our reasoning and emotional
patterns. We need to take a realistic stock of where we are before
we can heal our self-destructive thinking, feelings and behaviour.
Self-examination, courage, honesty and self-acceptance are the
principles we apply.

For those of us who do not believe that a god can intervene to
‘remove our shortcomings,’ we have to begin the process of
letting go of our negative behaviours and replacing them with
constructive ones. We build on our postive qualities and try to
improve our shortcomings. Pratice doesn’t always make perfect,
but it can result in progress. Humility and persistence are the
principles we apply.

The booklet Working Step Four in Narcotics Anonymous is also a
useful guide with this step.

Step Eight
We made a list of all persons we had harmed and became willing
to make amends to them all.

Step Nine
We made direct amends to such people wherever possible, except
when to do so would injure them or others.
Steps Eight and Nine should be universally applicable as originally
written, and they are already well elaborated in NA literature. We
correct as much damage from our pasts as we can, so that we
leave this baggage behind us and live with a clean slate. Courage
and trust are the principles we use to do this.
Step Ten
We continued to take personal inventory and when we were
wrong promptly admitted it.
Again, this formulation is very straight forward. If the term
‘wrong’ sounds moralistic to you, try: We continued to monitor
ourselves, to acknowledge our successes and to promptly correct
our lapses and errors. This is a process of honest and humble selfexamination that works best when practised on a daily basis.
Step Eleven
We sought through prayer and meditation to improve our
conscious contact with God as we understood Him, praying only
for knowledge of His will for us and the power to carry that out.
Cutting through the religious references in this step’s wording, it
simply means that we now move on with our lives by acting
consciously on our renewed values and goals. Of course, praying is
optional. Meditation is a useful method to still the mind from
distractions that any of us can use to reflect on, clarify and
improve our judgement in doing this.
It might be helpful to read this step as: We sought through
meditation to improve our understanding of ourselves and our
program of recovery. Self-examination, honesty and humility are
useful principles here.

Step Twelve
Having had a spiritual awakening as a result of these steps, we
tried to carry this message to addicts, and to practice these
principles in all our affairs.
If you are still uncomfortable with the words ‘spiritual awakening’,
this can be simply understood as ‘Having developed a deeper
wisdom as a result of these steps...’
‘We can only keep what we have by giving it away.’ Practising Step
Twelve enables us not only to express our gratitude for what was
freely shared with us by other addicts, but by passing on our
experience, strength and hope to the addict who still suffers, to
maintain and strengthen our own recovery. We can achieve the
freedom to never have to use again, but we also need to
remember where we came from.
The steps are not simply a process that we complete once and
then become ‘recovered.’ Our addiction is only in remission, just
for today. We learn that the steps are an on-going guide to our
recovery as we continue to learn to live life on life’s terms,
without the use of drugs.

Notes
1) Alcoholics Anonymous Comes of Age, 1957, pages 166167.
2) Narcotics Anonymous (Basic Text), 2008, Introduction,
page xxv.
3) World Service Board of Trustees Bulletin 19:
https://www.na.org/?ID=bulletins-bull19
4) Alcoholics Anonymous Comes of Age, 1957, page 81.

INSERT STORY HERE: ‘Atheists Recover Too’
‘Atheists Recover Too’ from Narcotics Anonymous, pages 274-277.
Copyright © 2008, Narcotics Anonymous World services Inc.
Reprinted by permission. All rights reserved.

